    Title: Bongli
    Date: 2020-03-20T08:24:06
    Tags: Spanish flu, Covid-19

Jasper recalls ...

# ONE FLU OUT, ONE FLU IN

My mom had found the house she was born in. We approached a knot of ladies standing near the house. They looked apprehensive, clearly wondering why we were visiting.

"Ek is in hierdie huis gebore" explained my mom. Their jaws dropped. "HIERDIE HUIS? Die miessies is in HIERDIE HUIS gebore?"

My mom continued the chat in Afrikaans, but they did not appear convinced.  Then she asked "Waar is Bongli?"

"BONGLI?" Another round of surprise.  "Nee, Bongli is LANKAL dood". But it changed things. They now believed, though they kept looking at this little dwelling with turquoise walls, nestled in a plantation, still astonshed that my mon's life had started in such a humble building.

<!-- more -->

She finished chatting, warm greetings were exchanged and we moved to the car.  Driving around Kat River, we left her birth farm, Amherst, and toured the outskirts of Lorraine, the "main" farm looked after by her father, Clarence Every. Amherst was the smaller, maybe less productive of the two farms.

When the Apartheid government created the Ciskei and expropriated some Kat River farms, Lorraine was the prize that Ciskei leader Oupa Qoza grabbed for himself.

Bongli, my Mom explained, was remembered as a hero of the 1918 Spanish Flu. With people coming down and expiring from the flu in the Kat River Valley, he saddled up, rode in to Fort Beaufort to ask for medicines, and retuned with vaccines. It was believed this action saved many lives in Kat River Valley, and Bongli was a hero for evermore.

It doesn't seem like the stuff of heroism these days. However, Bongli, apart from his foresight, also had to buck some trends: he must surely have been under pressure to stick with local, tribal healers, and to avoid white doctors. 

It's difficult to assess now how well people related: Apartheid was such a "thing" that many people don't know, for example, that there were middle class Africans, dressed in Victorian finery, some with cars, and many with farms and businesses, doing well, in those days. With Apartheid, that burgeoning middle class was lost to us. Perhaps, Bongli fournd himself with a doctor who thought he was "cheeky" to ask for medicine? I like to think not, and that the happy Hippocratic chappy gladly gave him the vaccines. Or maybe, Bongli's charm won the day. We'll never know. 

But ... HERE'S TO BONGLI!


