    Title: Birdsong
    Date: 2020-05-28T13:46:40
    Tags: Birdsong

## Birdsong

In Sebastian Faulks's book **Birdsong** set in WWI, he said that war was **"A huge crime against nature"**. Can anyone beat that for a description? 

Apart from millions of people from all over the world who lost their lives, thousands of square miles all over the world were damaged. In the Somme and Ardennes, a vast woodland, comprising the better part of Belgium, as well as large parts of France and Germany, was left bare of foliage, even stripped of branches. Many trees were uprooted by explosives, or burnt to the ground. Nearly every creature previously at home in those trees vanished, mostly vapourised. 

Millions of tons of lead and other poisonous munition metal were buried in the forests and grasslands.

It is unfathomable, when one realises most of our medicines come from trees and plants, what a sacrilege this was. It took more than half a century for them to recover, and recovery itself was not at a decent pace until, as one old man put it, **"they managed to get the birds back"**.

One day, science will prove (his and) Jasper's theory: that trees do notgrow well without birdsong. Those growth rings in the tree trunks we cut down mark the passage of years, but they will also prove to be a vibrant record of the subtle seasonal bird songs themselves. Sound etches those rings, as it did the grooves in vinyl records!

<!-- more -->

With Covid-19 quietening the planet, scientists are finding out all sorts of things. One is that the earth’s crust, particularly sensitive to the movement of tectonic plates as well as our noisy vibrations, started to move less, allowing detectors to possibly [spot smaller earthquakes and volcanic activity.](https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/#inbox/FMfcgxwHNMgFjWNvKwZsjJShTwDtcchP). Wars remain a crima against nature. It is good they are still noisy ... can you imagine anything more scary than a silent one? Like the 1918 Spanish Flu? After a four year bombardment, millions died sighing in their beds.

Our cities have filled with wild animals since lockdown. In some places, they show no fear of people. Mayabe it isn't **us** they shied away from, but our calamity of vehicle noise and poisoned air?


