    Title: 4IR
    Date: 2020-08-06T11:42:30
    Tags: Fourth Industrial Revolution


**The Fourth Industrial Revolution**

We are at the beginning of 4IR. What is it? Let's do key words for each so far. Industrial Revolution number:<br>
1. **Mechanisation**: textile looms, plough, steam<br>
2. **Heavy industry**: Mines, Oil, Electricity<br>
3. **Telecoms**: Electronics, Computers, Nuclear, Space<br>
4. **Internet**: ATMs, Cellphones, Smartphones<br>

Perhaps even more simply, we can trace the developments by travel:<br>

horse (dorp)<br>
steam (city)<br>
jetliner (state, continent)<br>
rocketliner (continent, planet)<br>

Really, rocket? Yes. Elon Musk thinks we can go anywhere on earth in half an hour. Where the Concorde billboards shouted __Breakfast in London, Lunch in New York__ (some added "_Luggage in Hong Kong_"), Musk believes it can be (for example) __Breakfast in London, Tea in Sydney__. Since SpaceX is already well into working on getting to Mars, why not just believe him? His "Starship" (looking like a huge, stainless steel beer can, maybe as big as those cylindrical apartment blocks) launched on Tuesday 4th of August, lifted itself 150m, then gently, successfully returned to the the ground.

Only a decade ago, rockets became junk soon after launch. These days, SpaceX returns them into use, though we don't know whether Starship will be re-used.

**What has _really_ changed from revolution to revolution, and what changes will 4IR bring?**

<!-- more -->

The clear changes were in speed. Quicker travel, quicker production, quicker communication. The Postal Economy survived through One thru Three, but has taken a step back, morphing into a mainly courier business. Have letters become too little to send? 

4IR speeds are astonishing. Take a nanosecond. A nanosecond is to one second as one second is to 32 years. 

The changes in speed also apply to pandemic spread, a lesson learned from the Spanish Flu of 1918. It travelled at the speed of soldiers returning home. In 1918, a soldier took weeks to return to Sydney from London. Putting this in rocketliner terms, COVID-19 could jump from London to Sydney in a half an hour. 

It stands to reason that space travel will not be a matter of hopping on the next available rocket - not without a complete set of pandemic precautions, no matter how long they may take. There's always a securocrat atound to slow travel down!















